---
title: How to enable different change cycles for resources using Flux and K8s.
layout: post
post-image: "https://raw.githubusercontent.com/MahrRah/mahra.dev/master/assets/images/image_mwpt2.jpg"
description:
  Restructuring GitOps repository to be able to enable multiple reconciliation types. eg real-time and maintenance window changes with the approach descript in
tags:
  - K8s
  - Flux
  - GitOps
---

<style>
td, th {
   border: none!important;
}
table th:first-of-type {
    width: 10%;
}
table th:nth-of-type(2) {
    width: 10%;
}
t
</style>

<!-- # Maintenance Windows Pt2 : How to enable different change cycles for resources using Flux and K8s. -->

**TL;DR: Restructuring GitOps repository to be able to enable multiple reconciliation types. eg real-time and maintenance window changes with the approach descript in [part 1 of this blog](mw-pt1)**

In some cases being only able to enable maintenance windows, as described in [part 1](mw-pt1) does not cover the use-case fully.

> If you haven't already read the [first part](mw-pt1), go back and do so, as we will use its approach on how to enable the maintenance window in this blog.

A more complicated scenario would be if you have some resources that you can only change during a maintenance window, but there are also some other resources that you want to be able to change with the normal behavior of flux. Which basically would mean applying the changes in real-time to the cluster.

So our new problem statement is:

_We want to enable two ways of applying changes to a cluster using Flux:_

- _**Real-time changes:** Representing the default behavior of Flux when it comes to reconciling changes._
- _**Maintenance windows changes:** Predefined time windows in which a change can be applied to the resource by Flux._

We can still use the core approach shown in [Part 1 of this series](mw-pt1) to solve our new problem. However, we need to make some small adjustments to how we organize our GitOps repository, to enable real-time as well as maintenance window changes.

> Note: This approach is true for any two reconciliation types. You can easily replace the real-time changes with a time window, that is different from the one already existing. The restructuring of the GitOps repository would be the same. You only need to add a new set of CronJobs to manage the new windows.

## Core

Before we start restructuring the repository, it might be useful to understand why we have to do so in the first place.
As you saw in the previous blog the granularity of control, we have on when changes get applied to the cluster, stops at the set of resources that are controlled by one `Kustomize` controller.
This means, to be able to control the reconciliation cycle differently for a group of resources, these resources need to be managed by an independent `Kustomize` controller.

So bottom line the goal of the next few sections are:
"Restructure the GitOps repository such that its resources can be managed by one of the N-`Kustomize` controllers we will create.
Where N defined the different ways of applying changes."

Given in this blog we are only interested in real-time and maintenance window changes, N is equal to 2.

## Set up your applications or components

Let's start with the smallest unit of grouping we have in our GitOps repository: `apps`

There are cases where one application has resources that should only change during a maintenance window, but also some resources that you should have free control over and be able to change in real-time.

To enable that the first step is to make sure we can split resources that can be changed real-time from resources that can only change state during a maintenance window form [`kustomizes`](https://kubernetes.io/docs/tasks/manage-kubernetes-objects/kustomization/) point of view.

> Note: Should I explain how kustomize finds the files it manages?

There are multiple ways to do this.
One would be to keep the existing structure and just remove the reference of resources of one changed type and reference them from another `kustomization.yaml`.
As complicated as this sentence sounds, the more complicated will the GitOps repository eventually become, due to the obscurity of what resource is referenced from where.

Another option is to split each application under `apps/` and `infra/` into two versions. These versions' sole purpose is to package the resources to be either managed by the real-time or the maintenance window `Kustomize` controller.
The advantage of this approach is that there is no need to go find in which `kustomizatin.yaml` resources are referenced to understand if it's managed by the real-time or the maintenance window `Kustomize` controller.

For maintainability reasons, we will use the second option.

We would split all manifest files into these two subfolders and add the respective suffixes to the subfolders:

- Real-time changes: `-rt`
- Maintenance windows changes: `-mw`

<table>
<tr>
<th>Origin </th>
<th>Enabeling Realtimeand Maintenance windows changes </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  
<pre><code>

apps
├── app-1
└── app-2
</code>
</pre>
  
</td>
<td>

<pre> <code>
apps
├── app-1
│   ├── app-1-rt
│   └── app-1-mw
└── app-2
    ├── app-2-rt
    └── app-2-mw
</code></pre>

</td>
</tr>
</table>

## Set up your clusters

Now let's put the pieces together and set up the individual cluster directory.

First, to be able to control the cluster with two different `Kustomize` controllers, we need to have two entry points to point the `Kustomize` controller to.

For that we split the previous `apps` and `infra` into two subfolders, `apps-rt`/`apps-mw` and `infra-rt`/`infra-mw`.

Where `./cluster/edge-02/apps/apps-rt` will be the entry point for the real-time `Kustomize` controller and `./cluster/edge-02/apps/apps-mw` for the maintenance window controller.

The folder structure compared side-by-side form before:

<table>
<tr>
<th>Origin </th>
<th>Enabeling Realtimeand Maintenance windows changes </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
  
<pre> <code>
clusters/edge-01
├── apps
│    └── app-1
└── infra
     └── maintenance-windows
</code></pre>
  
</td>
<td>

<pre> <code>
clusters/edge-02
├── apps
│   ├── apps-mw
│   │   └── app-1
│   └── apps-rt
│       └── app-1
└── infra
    ├── infra-mw
    │   └── maintenance-windows
    └── infra-rt
        └── maintenance-windows
</code></pre>

</td>
</tr>
</table>

The next step is to add the `kustomization.yaml` and its correct content to the respective folder.

Let's first have a look at the `clusters/edge-02/apps` setup.

Both `app-mw` and `app-rt` will have a root `kustomization.yaml` which will point to all applications deployed onto the cluster. In our example, this is only `app-1`.

<table>
<tr>
<th>Folder structure </th>
<th>`kustomization.yaml` of  </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

<pre> <code>
clusters/edge-02
├── apps
│   ├── apps-mw
│   │   ├── kustomization.yaml
│   │   └── app-1
│   └── apps-rt
│       ├── kustomization.yaml
│       └── app-1
└── infra
</code></pre> 

</td>
<td>

<pre> <code>
#clusters/edge-02/apps/apps-mw/kustomization.yaml
resources:
  - ./app-1
</code></pre> 

<pre> <code>
#clusters/edge-02/apps/apps-rt/kustomization.yaml
resources:
  - ./app-1
</code></pre> 

</td>
</tr>
</table>

Both the `app-1` under `clusters/edge-02/apps/app-mw` and `clusters/edge-02/apps/app-rt` have a similar setup. So as to not go over nearly the same thing twice we are going to look at the `clusters/edge-02/apps/app-rt` next, but as mentioned the full setup can be found in the [sample repository]().

<table>
<tr>
<th>Folder structure </th>
<th>`kustomization.yaml` of  </th>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>

<pre><code> 
clusters/edge-02
├── apps
│   ├── apps-mw
│   └── apps-rt
│       ├── kustomization.yaml
│       └── app-1
│           └── kustomization.yaml
└── infra
</code></pre> 

</td>
<td>

<pre><code> 
#clusters/edge-02/apps/apps-rt/app-1/kustomization.yaml
resources:
  - ./.../..././/./app-1/app-1-rt
</code></pre>

> Note: fix relative path

</td>
</tr>
</table>

As shown above, the application resources referenced under `clusters/edge-02/apps/apps-rt` are the resources we bundled up under `apps/app-1/app-1-rt` and should now only contain resources that can be changed in real-time.

And just like that you have separated all configurations to be managed by different controllers!

### Real-time update of window times

Remember in the previous setup, which only allowed changes to take effect in the maintenance windows, we could not change the maintenance window schedule in real-time.
By using the same principle as above for these jobs, we can enable real-time changes for the window time definition

## Set up `Kustomization` Controller.

Our GitOps repository is ready now, but how do we set up the `Kustomization` controller?
Lets first create a flux `Source` controller.

```sh
flux create source git source \
    --url="https://github.com/<github-handle>/flux-maintanance-windows-sample" \
    --username=<username> \
    --password=<PAT-token> \
    --branch=master \
    --interval=1m \
    --git-implementation=libgit2 \
    --silent
```

Next we now need two controllers for apps and two for infra.

```sh
flux create kustomizations .....
```

## Use it

Lets try configuration changes out!
We have an `nginx` instance we want to upgrade the version of, but also change the config XXX.
We want to be able to change config XXX when ever we want.
But given the complexity of `nginx` and upgrad should only happen between moday and Thrusday (No joke... but lets for once assume this upgrade has a high chance of catastriphical production incident and you want your engineers to be there in case somethinggoes worng)
